proposal: reduce queue sensitivity through pipeline retrieval (#805)
go-vela/community: proposals/2023/5-11_queue-sensitivity.md

| **Status**    | Under Review                                                                                         |

<!--
If you're already working with someone, please add them to the proper author/reviewer category.

If not, please leave the reviewer category empty and someone from the Vela team will assign it to themself.

Here is a brief explanation of the different proposal statuses:

1. Reviewed: The proposal is currently under review or has been reviewed.

2. Accepted: The proposal has been accepted and is ready for implementation.

3. In Progress: An accepted proposal is being implemented by actual work.

NOTE: The design is subject to change during this phase.

4. Cancelled: While or before implementation the proposal was cancelled.

NOTE: This can happen for a multitude of reasons.

5. Complete: This feature/change is implemented.
-->

## Background

<!--
This section is intended to describe the new feature, redesign or refactor.
-->

**Please provide a summary of the new feature, redesign or refactor:**

<!--
Provide your description here.
-->

This proposal is small piece to a larger effort to increase the overall security of the platform.

> The problem being solved is that the Redis queue is currently a potential attack vector with direct regard to the information compiled in plaintext into the pipeline object, namely the `NETRC_PASSWORD` placed in the environment.
> 
> The feature proposed is a modification to what data the server places directly on the queue and to offload the potentially sensitive compiled pipeline to a table in the database that must be requested when the build is ready for execution. The server would enqueue only the build's ID, which the worker would pop from the queue. The worker would use a minted build token to retrieve the compiled pipeline, increasing the work required to compromise a repo owner's token in the event of a worker compromise. This should not impact the functionality of the platform, and is moreso a security-driven improvement to decrease Redis' potential as an attack vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem being solved is that the Redis queue is currently a potential attack vector with direct regard to the information compiled in plaintext into the executable pipeline build object, namely the `NETRC_PASSWORD` placed in the environment.

The feature proposed is a modification to what data the server places directly on the queue and to offload the potentially sensitive executable pipeline build to a table in the database that must be requested when the build is ready for execution. The server would enqueue only the build's ID, which the worker would pop from the queue. The worker would use a minted build token to retrieve the executable pipeline build, increasing the work required to compromise a repo owner's token in the event of a worker compromise. This should not impact the functionality of the platform, and is moreso a security-driven improvement to decrease Redis' potential as an attack vector.
```

1. If this is a redesign or refactor, what issues exist in the current implementation?

<!-- Answer here -->

The current queue implementation involves placing sensitive pipeline information like the user token in Redis, and the worker depends on this information being present to properly execute builds.

1. Are there any other workarounds, and if so, what are the drawbacks?

<!-- Answer here -->

It's possible to improve security around the queue in other ways, like using a [READONLY](https://redis.io/commands/readonly/) replica, though it doesn't improve the sensitivity of the data that can be read.

We could also look into GitHub Apps to limit the blast radius if the queue were compromised as an attack vector.

1. Are there any related issues? Please provide them below if any exist.

<!-- Answer here -->

Indirect: https://github.com/go-vela/community/issues/804

## Design

<!--
This section is intended to explain the solution design for the proposal.

NOTE: If there are no current plans for a solution, please leave this section blank.
-->

**Please describe your solution to the proposal. This includes, but is not limited to:**

> * new database table to store interim compiled pipelines
> * new endpoint to retrieve a compiled pipeline from the server
> * modification to the [Item](https://github.com/go-vela/types/blob/main/item.go#L12C1-L18) currently placed on the queue to only push build ID
> * modification to webhook processing to push the compiled pipeline to a separate table
> * added interaction between worker and server to request a compiled pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* new database table to store interim executable builds
* new endpoint to retrieve a executable build from the server
* modification to the [Item](https://github.com/go-vela/types/blob/main/item.go#L12C1-L18) currently placed on the queue to only push build ID
* modification to webhook processing to push the executable build to a separate table
* added interaction between worker and server to request an executable build
```

<!-- Answer here -->

For reference please review the following design diagram that explains the approach from a high level.

```mermaid

> flowchart TD
>     A[GitHub] --> B[Vela Server]
>     B --> |compile\npush compiled| C[Redis Queue]
>     C --> |pop compiled| D[Vela Worker]
>     D --> E(execute build)
> 
>     F[GitHub] --> G[Vela Server]
>     G --> |compile\npush compiled| H[Database]
>     G --> |push build_id| K[Redis Queue]
>     K --> |pop build_id| I[Vela Worker]
>     I --> |request compiled from server\nvia build_token| G
>     I --> J(execute build)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flowchart TD
    A[GitHub] --> B[Vela Server]
    B --> |compile\npush executable build| C[Redis Queue]
    C --> |pop executable build| D[Vela Worker]
    D --> E(execute build)

    F[GitHub] --> G[Vela Server]
    G --> |compile\npush executable build| H[Database]
    G --> |push build_id| K[Redis Queue]
    K --> |pop build_id| I[Vela Worker]
    I --> |request executable build\nfrom server via build_token| G
    I --> J(execute build)
```

which looks like:
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[GitHub] --> B[Vela Server]
    B --> |compile\npush executable build| C[Redis Queue]
    C --> |pop executable build| D[Vela Worker]
    D --> E(execute build)

    F[GitHub] --> G[Vela Server]
    G --> |compile\npush executable build| H[Database]
    G --> |push build_id| K[Redis Queue]
    K --> |pop build_id| I[Vela Worker]
    I --> |request executable build\nfrom server via build_token| G
    I --> J(execute build)
```

```

New functionality that is absolutely required:

#### Server

- GET `api/v1/<org>/<repo>/build/<number>/compiled` or `api/v1/search/builds/<id>/compiled` to retrieve a compiled pipeline using a build token

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Reviewer: I guess most of my confusion comes from the `PostWebhook` method which has `p`, `b`, `pipeline`, and `compiled` vars. Keeping track of what's what and why the vars are different is confusing. esp because `compiled` gets saved to the database as a `pipeline`.

https://github.com/go-vela/server/blob/main/api/webhook.go#L133
https://github.com/go-vela/server/blob/main/api/webhook.go#L410-L413
https://github.com/go-vela/server/blob/main/api/webhook.go#L434
https://github.com/go-vela/server/blob/main/api/webhook.go#L508-L518
https://github.com/go-vela/server/blob/main/api/webhook.go#L561-L562
https://github.com/go-vela/server/blob/main/api/webhook.go#L697-L705
```go
func PostWebhook(c *gin.Context) {
	...
	h, r, b := webhook.Hook, webhook.Repo, webhook.Build // *library.Hook, *library.Repo, *library.Build
	...
	var(
		// variable to store the raw pipeline configuration
		config []byte
		// variable to store executable pipeline
		p *pipeline.Build
		// variable to store pipeline configuration
		pipeline *library.Pipeline
	)
	...
	pipeline, err = database.FromContext(c).GetPipelineForRepo(b.GetCommit(), repo)
	if err != nil { // assume the pipeline doesn't exist in the database yet
		// send API call to capture the pipeline configuration file
		config, err = scm.FromContext(c).ConfigBackoff(u, repo, b.GetCommit())
		...
	} else {
		config = pipeline.GetData()
	}
	...
	var compiled *library.Pipeline
	// parse and compile the pipeline configuration file
	p, compiled, err = compiler.FromContext(c).
		Duplicate().
		WithBuild(b).
		WithComment(webhook.Comment).
		WithFiles(files).
		WithMetadata(m).
		WithRepo(repo).
		WithUser(u).
		Compile(config)
	...
	if pipeline == nil {
		pipeline = compiled
		err = database.FromContext(c).CreatePipeline(pipeline)
	...
	// publish the build to the queue
	go publishToQueue(
		queue.FromGinContext(c),
		database.FromContext(c),
		p,
		b,
		repo,
		u,
	)
)
...
func publishToQueue(queue queue.Service, db database.Service, p *pipeline.Build, b *library.Build, r *library.Repo, u *library.User) {
	item := types.ToItem(p, b, r, u)
...
```

So, I guess these are related like this, right?
- `database/build` -> `library/build` event-based metadata for a build
- `database/pipeline` -> `library/pipeline` the raw pipeline for a SHA
- `database/compiled` -> `pipeline/build` the compiled pipeline = raw SHA pipeline + build metadata

If that's right, then maybe the `types/pipeline` module is effectively a `library/compiled` module which means `pipeline/build` is logically a `library/compiled/build`?

When implementing this proposal, I hope that at least the `PostWebhook` method becomes clearer and easier to follow.

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Author: yeah thats great feedback thanks @cognifloyd 
i have the same understanding of the 3 builds tables but i agree theres room to improve the clarity on these. 
i see it like this:
`build` -> as event-based metadata that is generated through processing the webhook
`pipeline` -> as the raw vela pipeline data that is attached to a commit in git
`compiled` -> as the executable pipeline in JSON that is derived from the pipeline+webhook-data, which is different from pipeline as it contains the substituted metadata and anything purged from, say, rulesets for example.

to be honest im not completely in love with the name `compiled` because its a bit vague and only implies that the pipeline YAML has been compiled by the server... which is true but its not completely accurate.

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Reviewer 2: > Is this right?
> flowchart LR
>     A[Pipeline] --> |1:n| B[Build]
>     B --> |1:1| C[Compiled]

Yeah, exactly. Naming is tricky when all three things are somewhat all related... 

The way I like to think about it is:
`library.Build` -> Vela's record of the build (metadata mostly)
`library.Pipeline` -> What the contents of the `.vela.yml` are at any given commit
`pipeline.Build` -> The script we give to the worker to run the build

I'm glad you pointed out this line here:
```go
	p, compiled, err = compiler.FromContext(c).
		Duplicate().
		WithBuild(b).
		WithComment(webhook.Comment).
		WithFiles(files).
		WithMetadata(m).
		WithRepo(repo).
		WithUser(u).
		Compile(config)
```

Perhaps there is a better name than `compiled`. Because in this case the `p` is a `pipeline.Build` whereas the `compiled` is a `library.Pipeline`.

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Reviewer: Maybe instead of `Compiled` we could use `ExecutablePipeline`?

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Reviewer 2: I like `executable`!

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Reviewer: I think `ExecutableBuild` would be even better, because it is a particular build that the worker runs.

So my chart ends up looking like this:
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A[Pipeline] --> |1:n| B[Build]
    B --> |1:1| C[ExecutableBuild]
```

> - GET `api/v1/<org>/<repo>/build/<number>/compiled` or `api/v1/search/builds/<id>/compiled` to retrieve a compiled pipeline using a build token
> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- GET `api/v1/<org>/<repo>/build/<number>/executable` or `api/v1/search/builds/<id>/executable` to retrieve a compiled pipeline using a build token
- `database/executable` package and a new database table `executable` that will contain executable pipeline builds in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.
```

> - `database/compiled` package and a new database table `compiled` that will contain precompiled pipelines in bytes, formerly stored directly on the Redis queue.

Author: i like executable build, also

- separate database row creation in addition to the Redis [Item](https://github.com/go-vela/types/blob/main/item.go#L12C1-L18) push

> #### Worker
> 
> - should perform a GET `api/v1/<org>/<repo>/build/<number>/compiled` or `api/v1/search/builds/<id>/compiled` to retrieve a compiled pipeline using a build token
> 
> #### Types
> 
> Removing the `pipeline.Build` from the `Item` published to the queue, which represents the "compiled pipeline".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Worker

- should perform a GET `api/v1/<org>/<repo>/build/<number>/executable` or `api/v1/search/builds/<id>/executable` to retrieve an executable pipeline build using a build token

#### Types

Removing the `pipeline.Build` from the `Item` published to the queue, which represents the "executable pipeline build" (aka "executable build").
```
